= The Python Paradox is backwards

Paul Graham wrote a great short article back in 2004 called [The Python
Paradox](http://www.paulgraham.com/pypar.html) where he states that if you look
for python programmers you will end up with the best ones. The logic behind this
is as follows:

Python is an esoteric language that universities and schools don't teach, so
people that knows python are self thought, they know that their python skills
wouldn't get them a better job so they do it for fun only; Considering that
learning a new programming language can not be precisely a trivial task and that
python knowledge wouldn't rank you higher for hiring we can infer that it takes
a really passionate person, a hacker, to learn and use python.

That was very true **12 years ago**, but now almost every single school and
university not only teaches python, but use it as the primary language, and even
as the *only* language!. Nowadays even some non technical schools teaches
programming as a form of introducing their students to computers-logical
thinking and they all use python precisely because of its simplicity; They even
tend to over simplify an already simple language so their less clever students
can catch it with ease.

This leads to the current situation: if you look for python programmers you will
get a lot of good programmers, thats for sure, but you will also get some of the
very worst ones; Actually the most part will be bad programmers. As the language
gets more and more popular this disproportion continues to grow in a way that
the paradox tends not only to completely fail but also to get **reversed**.

Today everyone knows python and maybe is the only language they know because is
the only language they were forced to learn in school. For others, python is the
language they use the most because it was the main language of choice in
university.

Those excellent passionate programmers and real hackers who learned python
because of fun 10 or 15+ years ago are now an infinite reduced minority buried
among of tons of lame programmers mass produced at *PhythonSchools* which is
nowadays kind of the new Joel's
[JavaShools](http://www.joelonsoftware.com/articles/ThePerilsofJavaSchools.html).


Mr. Graham said:

> I didn't mean by this that Java programmers are dumb. I meant that Python
> programmers are smart.


And here I'm not saying that python programmers are dumb. There are a lot of
excellent programmers out there that use python as their language of choice, but
if you're going to use python as the filter described in Graham's essay in
2016+, be prepared to end up looking for a needle in a haystack.

Even though I think the *Python Paradox* does not longer work, I totally agree
with Graham's thoughts in a deeper way. The language of the original paradox
(*python*) may no longer be a badge of great programmers, but because of the
paradox's time sensitivity it tends to shift towards another languages that may
or may not be the newer ones.

These days C and C++ programming languages are very rarely used as teaching
languages and students will only get lots of Python and Java in the class rooms.
I acknowledge that this might be very geographical sensitive and that schools
and universities in different parts of the world will take different approaches,
but still Python gets far more attention for teaching than C or C++ does. Lots
of students will get a C/C++ semester or so (Over simplified C/C++ in most
cases) but then forget about it and continue to write Python or Java only.

Now consider the fact that C/C++ are by a fair amount harder to learn and use
than python if it's the first time you get in touch with computer programming,
and that if you're not doing operating system programming you wouldn't actually
*need* to write C and can perfectly make a whole career using whatever language
you like without ever write a line of C/C++.

The *Paradox* might now point to (but not be limited to) C/C++. Take a bunch of
new generations programmers out of a
[Python/JavaSchool](http://www.joelonsoftware.com/articles/ThePerilsofJavaSchools.html),
pick those who know and like to write C/C++ and chances are you'll end up with
passionate hackers.

Take into account that the *Paradox* point to different languages over time, but
it does not point only forward to newer languages but also to older ones, and
that this pointer can actually tend to move away from the trending languages.
Take Perl (or Lisp or Scheme or ...) as another example; What kind of people
would like to learn by them selfs a "difficult/complex" language that is not as
used as Python or Java and that will not make you more appealing for a job? -
Real passionate hackers that enjoy it, and do it well, just as the paradox
predicts.
